evgeniy.zhelenskiy/will-become-value (#492)
Kotlin/KEEP: proposals/KEEP-0465-will-become-value.md

# `@WillBecomeValue` annotation

* **Type**: Design proposal
* **Author**: Evgeniy Zhelenskiy
* **Status**: Proposed
* **Discussion and feedback**: TODO

> # Summary

Reviewer: I would suggest for the summary to be a bit more descriptive about why and what `@WillBecomeValue` does. Ideally, after reading the summary I should understand 1) what it is about 2) how it does things 3) whether I should care about it.

Also, a ToC after would be appreciated.

Author: Fixed it

This KEEP proposes the `@WillBecomeValue` annotation — a Kotlin equivalent of Java's
`@jdk.internal.ValueBased` from [JEP 390](https://openjdk.org/jeps/390). The original Java annotation marks existing
reference-based classes whose identity semantics should not be relied upon, because they are

> intended to become value classes in after the [Valhalla](https://openjdk.org/projects/valhalla/) project release.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
intended to become value classes once the [Valhalla](https://openjdk.org/projects/valhalla/) project releases.
```

> intended to become value classes in after the [Valhalla](https://openjdk.org/projects/valhalla/) project release.

Reviewer 2: If possible, I would avoid saying that we're doing something because Java is doing it.

```suggestion
This KEEP proposes the `@WillBecomeValue` annotation to mark existing reference-based classes
whose identity semantics should not be relied upon. That prepares existing code for the transition
to a [multi-field value class](https://github.com/Kotlin/KEEP/blob/main/proposals/KEEP-0454-better-immutability-value-classes-MFVC.md). In particular, developer can start receiving warnings about
wrong usages of those classes _now_, instead of waiting for them to become full value classes.
```

> The annotation is necessary for the gradual migration process. However, the original Java

Reviewer: I feel that the "However" part is a bit sudden and disconnected for the uninitiated aka a reader not following the work on MFVC / Valhalla closely does not understand why this "However" is important.

Reviewer 2: I would go as far as removing the part about the annotation being internal. We could later say that we cannot `typealias` is in the JVM because it's internal, but regardless of that fact, we still need a new one.

annotation is internal in JDK.

# Motivation

## Background: value classes in Kotlin

Kotlin supports `value class` — a class modifier that strips object identity, enabling more safety and effeciency. Value classes guarantee that two
instances with the same state are indistinguishable: there is no reliable way to distinguish
them by reference equality (`===`), `System.identityHashCode`, or synchronization. Thus, such usages are forbidden for them.

> However, the process of migrating existing classes to `value class` is a breaking change for two reasons:

Reviewer: 2 reasons and list with 4 items. Something is off.

> However, the process of migrating existing classes to `value class` is a breaking change for two reasons:

Reviewer: I think you are conflating here two kinds of migrations -- existing classes to full value classes and existing inline value classes to full value classes, and we actually care about only one of them w.r.t. `@ValueBased`

1. The mentioned restrictions
2. ABI change on JVM (in case of the existing `@JvmInline` value classes)
3. Currently existing `@JvmInline` value classes support only a single field.
4. Currently existing `@JvmInline` value classes cannot be abstract/sealed.

> The second problem is not a problem for full value classes,

Reviewer: I feel we are missing a short intro of inline and full value classes somewhere in the KEEP.

Without any prior warning, library authors cannot migrate widely-used classes to value classes
without risking undetected breakage in downstream code.

## Java's solution: `@jdk.internal.ValueBased`

JEP 390 addressed this for the JDK by introducing a `@ValueBased` annotation. When applied to
a class, it signals:

1. The class is intended to have value semantics (no meaningful identity).
2. Code that relies on its identity (reference equality, locking, serialization of identity)
   may break in a future JVM release.
3. The JVM may warn or err when identity-sensitive operations are performed on such instances.

This allows the JDK to gradually evolve classes like `Integer`, `Optional`, and `LocalDate`
toward value types under Project Valhalla, while giving users time to fix problematic usage.

Kotlin already supports the annotation: as tracked in [KT-70722](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KT-70722),
the compiler recognizes `@jdk.internal.ValueBased` on JDK classes and issues warnings for
identity-sensitive operations on their instances. `@WillBecomeValue` extends this mechanism
to Kotlin-defined classes.

## Kotlin's need for an equivalent

> Kotlin needs the same mechanism for its own migration path:

Reviewer: KMP looks like yet another major reason to get `@WillBecomeValue` aka other platforms

Author: Agree

| `@IdentityFree` | A synonym for `value`, effectively introducing a second name for the same concept                 |
| `@TreatAsValue` | Does not explain *why* the class is not already a `value class`; also does not hint that usages produce warnings rather than errors |

`@WillBecomeValue` was selected because it:
- Makes the migration intent explicit: the class *will become* a `value class`, but cannot be one yet due to compatibility or language constraints.
- Explains why identity-sensitive usages produce warnings rather than errors — the class is not a value class *yet*, so the compiler warns rather than forbids.
- Is unambiguous: it cannot be confused with `value class` itself, unlike `@ValueBased` or `@IdentityFree`.

# Design

## Annotation declaration

```kotlin
@Target(AnnotationTarget.CLASS)
@Retention(AnnotationRetention.BINARY)
@MustBeDocumented
annotation class WillBecomeValue
```

## Semantics

A class annotated with `@WillBecomeValue`:

1. **Must not be relied upon for identity.** Reference equality (`===`), `identityHashCode`,
   and synchronization on instances are considered undefined behavior and may be flagged by
   the compiler or runtime.

> 2. **Must be immutable (or effectively immutable).** Mutating state through shared references

Reviewer: Shallow immutable?

Reviewer: Also, will we do warnings when one tries to apply `@WillBecomeValue` to smth with a backing field `var`?

Reviewer: I guess there's a more general question of: do we want to ensure that, if one marks their class with `@WillBecomeValue` and there are no warnings, once it is changed to `value` there are also no warnings?

Author: Thanks, I'll write about it.

Author: My answer is yes and I explained it now

   undermines the value semantics the annotation promises.

> 3. **Is a candidate for future migration to `value class`.** Library authors are not obligated

Reviewer: I'd say that's another reason why `@WillBecomeValue` is not such a great name, if the migration is never completed, the name misdirects. `@ValueBased` is better in this regard.

Author: Why would they need to do it? IMHO, it's actually a great example of the annotation's misuse.

   to complete the migration, but the annotation sets that expectation.

## Compiler warnings

The compiler should issue a warning when the following
identity-sensitive operations are applied to a type annotated with `@WillBecomeValue`:

- Reference equality: `a === b`
- Locking: `synchronized(a) { }`
- `System.identityHashCode(a)`

## Applicability

The annotation can be applied to:
- Regular (reference) final classes.
- Abstract classes and sealed classes, intended as base types.

It **cannot** be applied to:
- Classes already declared as `value class`.
- Interfaces (identity is not a concept that applies directly).
- `object` declarations (singletons intentionally have identity).
- Enums (enumerations cannot become value types).

> - Open classes (value classes are not going to be ever supported to be open).

Reviewer: I would not say "ever", let's tone it down a bit?

# `@WillBecomeValue` annotation

* **Type**: Design proposal
* **Author**: Evgeniy Zhelenskiy
* **Status**: Proposed
* **Discussion and feedback**: TODO

# Abstract

This KEEP proposes the `@WillBecomeValue` annotation to mark existing reference-based classes
whose identity semantics should not be relied upon. That prepares them for migration
to [full value classes](https://github.com/Kotlin/KEEP/blob/main/proposals/KEEP-0454-better-immutability-value-classes-MFVC.md).

In particular, by using the annotation a developer initiates reporting warnings about usages of identity for those classes in the downstream code,
allowing not to break with errors the downstream code immediately by marking the classes as `value class`es.

> The annotation is necessary for the gradual migration process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In particular, by using this annotation a developer helps their downstream users to not break their code when the class is changed to a value class, as those users will get migration warnings about usages which will stop being valid.
Without this mechanism, the adoption of full value classes would be a slower and harder process.
```

# Table of contents

* [Abstract](#abstract)
* [Table of contents](#table-of-contents)
* [Motivation](#motivation)
  * [Background: value classes in Kotlin](#background-value-classes-in-kotlin)
  * [The migration problem](#the-migration-problem)
  * [Java's solution: `@jdk.internal.ValueBased`](#javas-solution-jdkinternalvaluebased)
  * [Kotlin's need for an equivalent](#kotlins-need-for-an-equivalent)
  * [Naming](#naming)
* [Design](#design)
  * [Annotation declaration](#annotation-declaration)
  * [Semantics](#semantics)
  * [Compiler warnings](#compiler-warnings)
  * [Applicability](#applicability)
  * [Interaction with value classes](#interaction-with-value-classes)
* [References](#references)

# Motivation

## Background: value classes in Kotlin

> Kotlin supports `value class` — a class modifier that strips object identity, enabling more safety and effeciency. Value classes guarantee that two

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kotlin supports `value class` — a class modifier that strips object identity, enabling more safety and efficiency. Value classes guarantee that two
```

instances with the same state are indistinguishable: there is no reliable way to distinguish
them by reference equality (`===`), `System.identityHashCode`, or synchronization. Thus, such usages are forbidden for them.

> Kotlin currently supports inline `value class`es which are a subset of `value class`es that have a single underlying field.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kotlin currently supports a very limited subset of `value class`es: inline `value class`es with a single underlying field.
```

Their main purpose is to create type-safe wrappers around existing types being transparent in the runtime.
Many libraries and frameworks (`kotlinx.serialization`, `Spring`) adopted the usage and embed the underlying field, keeping safe wrapper only on the source code level.
Such a behavior is not acceptable for general purpose value classes.
Due to this and other restrictions, far not all existing classes can be marked as `value class` while only inline `value class`es are supported.

There are plans to support [full `value class`es](https://github.com/Kotlin/KEEP/blob/69d675e8a15f66ff6b3dace70b2d45bc3d6ad26a/proposals/KEEP-0454-better-immutability-value-classes-MFVC.md) in the future.
These value classes behave similarly to `data class`es, but have no identity, component functions, copy function.

> They support multiple fields, abstract/sealed classes. Read more about them in the dedicated KEEP.

Reviewer: I'd rephrase to compare full value classes with the currently supported inline ones: that they lift most of the restrictions important for the data use-cases, and people would want to change their current classes to them.

They are the main target to migrate the existing immutable classes to.

However, the process of migrating existing classes to `value class` is a breaking change for several reasons:
1. The mentioned restrictions regarding identity operations might break existing code.

> 2. Currently existing `@JvmInline` value classes support only a single field.

Reviewer: Will we cover reasons 2 and 3? Do we want to? I'd say drop them and focus more on the actual differences and restrictions between ref-based and value-based types.

Author: > Will we cover reasons 2 and 3?

Yes. Full value classes cover them. And that's written below.

Reviewer: Yes, but will we cover these reasons with `@WillBecomeValue`? Are they important for the migration trajectory which this annotation targets?

To my mind, it's about ref-based to value-based types, and talking about the `inline value class` => `full value class` migration only confuses the reader.

3. Currently existing `@JvmInline` value classes cannot be abstract/sealed.

When migration to the existing inline `value class` is theoretically possible (the mentinioned problems do not apply),
the following problems are still present:
1. Change in the behavior of `kotlinx.serialization`, `Spring` and other frameworks which have special handling for inline `value class`es. 
2. ABI change on JVM.
3. Worse interoperability with Java.

It stops users from migrating to inline `value class`es.

> Since only problem 3 can be mitigated (with `@JvmExposeBoxed`), the scope of the rest of the proposal is the migration to the full `value class`es.

Reviewer: I'm not sure we even wanna mention this, as this is completely parallel to what the current KEEP is about.

> The only problem that still remains for full `value class`es is identity-related operation restrictions because:

Reviewer: Not really, we are restricting `open` classes also, right? And maybe we need smth else? E.g., `var` with a backing field?

* ABI is kept the same (enabling support of [Project Valhalla](https://openjdk.org/projects/valhalla/) on JVM is going to change only the attributes, not descriptors or signatures).
* The full `value class`es allow multiple fields and can be `abstract`/`sealed`.

> The standard library already contains classes that behave like values — they are immutable,

Reviewer: I think this should be a part of what I mentioned before -- a section talking about when people would like value-based types and not reference-based ones.

[JEP 390](https://openjdk.org/jeps/390) addressed this problem for the JDK by introducing a `@ValueBased` annotation. When applied to
a class, it signals:

1. The class is intended to have value semantics (no meaningful identity).
2. Code that relies on its identity (reference equality, locking, serialization of identity)
   may break in a future JVM release.
3. The JVM may report warnings or errors when identity-sensitive operations are performed on such instances.

This allows the JDK to gradually evolve classes like `Integer`, `Optional`, and `LocalDate`
toward value types under [Project Valhalla](https://openjdk.org/projects/valhalla/), while giving users time to fix problematic usage.

Kotlin already supports the annotation: as tracked in [KT-70722](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KT-70722),
the compiler recognizes `@jdk.internal.ValueBased` on JDK classes and issues warnings for
identity-sensitive operations on their instances. `@WillBecomeValue` extends this mechanism
to Kotlin-defined classes.

## Kotlin's need for an equivalent

Kotlin needs the same mechanism for its own migration path:

- Kotlin needs the annotation to be available on all target platforms.

> - Library authors (including the Kotlin standard library team) want to signal that a class is

Reviewer: I think within this list you are mixing several different things: how we want the annotation to work aka what it means, how it is different from the JDK's one and what additional constraints Kotlin has, how the annotation is applied.

But the section is about: why we need an equivalent, I'd focus on that then.

  are applied to annotated instances, giving developers time to fix their code.
- When the class is eventually migrated to `value class`, the change will be much less likely
  to cause silent regressions.

## Naming

The annotation is named **`@WillBecomeValue`**. The name was chosen over three other candidates:

| Name            | Why rejected                                                                                                                         |
|-----------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `@ValueBased`   | Ambiguous alongside the existing `value class` keyword — "value-based" vs. "value" is confusing.                                     |
| `@IdentityFree` | A synonym for `value`, effectively introducing a second name for the same concept.                                                   |
| `@TreatAsValue` | Does not explain *why* the class is not already a `value class`; also does not hint that usages produce warnings rather than errors. |

`@WillBecomeValue` was selected because it:

> - Makes the migration intent explicit: the class *will become* a `value class`, but cannot be one yet due to compatibility or language constraints.

Reviewer: But if this never happens, this annotation is a lie :hehe:

3. **Is a candidate for future migration to `value class`.**
   Library authors are expected to complete the migration to prevent libraries from keeping the annotation forever.

All the checks eligible for full value class declaration itself ***(not usages)*** are also run on classes annotated with `@WillBecomeValue`.
The only observable difference is that the compiler will issue a warning instead of an error for wrong class **usages**.

## Compiler warnings

The compiler should issue a warning when the following
identity-sensitive operations are applied to a type annotated with `@WillBecomeValue`:

- Reference equality: `a === b`
- Locking: `synchronized(a) { }`
- `System.identityHashCode(a)`

## Applicability

The annotation can be applied to:
- Regular (reference) final classes.
- Abstract classes and sealed classes, intended as base types.

It **cannot** be applied to:
- Classes already declared as `value class`.
- Interfaces (interfaces are common for identity and value classes).
- `object` declarations (singletons intentionally have identity).
- Enums (enumerations cannot become value types).
- Open classes (value classes are not going to be supported to be `open`).

> ## Interaction with value classes

Reviewer: That's already covered by the first item in the list above, I think
